# Step 2: Create policy tag


To configure QoS on the devices in your network, first define the scope of the devices to which you want to apply QoS policies. You use the `Policy Tag` for this purpose. Then, you define the QoS policy for the scope. The Cisco APIC-EM takes your selections, translates them into the proper device configurations, and deploys them as QoS configurations onto the devices defined in the scope.

## Policy elements

Policy comprises the following elements:

* <font color='red'>**Policy Scope** — Group of devices with the same policy tag that are configured with the policy.</font>

* **Applications** — Software programs or network signaling protocols that are used in your network. EasyQoS includes Cisco Network-Based Application Recognition, a second generation (NBAR2) application library containing approximately 1400 distinct applications and sub-applications. In this session, you create a custom application to be used for creating policy.

* **Traffic Classes** — Groups of applications that make configuring policies easier, because the groups contain applications that have similar traffic needs.

* **Business-relevance** — An attribute that classifies a given application according to how relevant it is to your business and operations. The attributes are business relevant, default, and business irrelevant.


## Objectives

Learn how to use the EasyQoS related APIs to create a policy tag.

These are the steps of creating a policy using APIC-EM APIs:


1. <font color='red'>Create Policy Tag</font>
   * POST /policy/tag
2. Attach policy tags to network devices for policy scope (where you want EasyQOS to be enabled)
   * POST /policy/tag/association
3. Select one or more applications to be used in the policy. Create a custom application, if needed.
   * POST /application
4. Create and Apply Policy.
   * POST /policy

## Task 1 - Create policy tag
Using the `POST /policy/tag` API is straightforward: Assign a tag name (string) to the `policy tag` attribute and use it for the POST request.

```
{
  "policyTag": "put your policy tag name here"
}
```

### Code -- Create policy tag `POST /policy/tag`

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

*  Source code file: lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py
*  To run the Python file, enter:<br>
   *  On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py` <br>
   *  On Windows: `py -3 lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py` or `python lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py` <br>

**Code listing : `lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab1-1-post-policy-tag.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab1-1-post-policy-tag
Create a policy tag
"""

from apicem import \* # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

def create_policy_tag(ap,tag_json):
    """
    This function creates a policy tag

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object that is defined in apicem.py
    tag_json(JSON): A JSON object for POST /policy/tag

    Return:
    -------
    None

    """

    try:
        resp = ap.post(api="policy/tag",data=tag\_json,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("Something wrong with POST /policy/tag !")

##################################################################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script

    myapicem = apicem() # Initialize apicem instance, taking all defaults from apicem_config.py

    # Get the user's input in the loop until input is not null or is 'exit'
    print ("** Tag must only include letters, numbers, underscore and hyphen, with no spaces between words **")
    while True:
        pTag = input('=> Enter the name of the policy tag that you want to create: ')
        pTag = pTag.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if pTag.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()  
        if pTag == "":
            print ("Oops! Policy tag name cannot be NULL please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            break

    # JSON for "POST policy/tag" request, taking user's input as tag name <br>       
    tag_json = {
        "policyTag": pTag    
    }

    create_policy_tag(myapicem,tag_json) # Create tag function

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
` Tag must only include letters, numbers, underscore and hyphen, no space between two words `
=> Enter policy tag name that you like to create: devnet_tag

Executing POST 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag'

POST 'policy/tag' Status:  202

Response:
 {
    "version": "1.0",
    "response": {
        "taskId": "55f778c0-659f-4898-b646-bc35a3faf9a5",
        "url": "/api/v1/task/55f778c0-659f-4898-b646-bc35a3faf9a5"
    }
}
</code></pre>
</details>

To check if the policy tag is created, use the `GET /policy/tag` API. (See `lab1-2-get-policy-tag.py`.) You should see something like the following:


```
Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag'

GET 'policy/tag' Status:  200

{
  "response": [
    {
      "policyTag": "devnet_tag"
    }
  ],
  "version": "1.0"
}
```

## Next step

Proceed to Step 3: Create policy tag association.
