# Step 3: Create policy tag association

## Policy elements

* **Policy Scope** — A group of devices with the same policy tag that are configured with the policy.</font>

* **Applications** — Software programs or network signaling protocols that are used in your network. EasyQoS includes Cisco Network-Based Application Recognition, the second generation (NBAR2) application library (with approximately 1400 distinct applications), and sub-applications. In this session, you create a custom application to be used for creating policy.

* **Traffic Classes** — Groups of applications that make configuring policies easier, because the groups contain applications that have similar traffic needs.

* **Business-relevance** — An attribute that classifies a given application according to how relevant it is to your business and operations. The attributes are `business relevant` , `default`, and `business irrelevant`.


## Objectives

Learn how to use the EasyQoS-related APIs to associate a policy with a network device.

Create a policy using the following APIC-EM APIs:

1. Create a Policy Tag
   * `POST /policy/tag`
2. <font color='red'>Attach policy tags to network devices for policy scope (where you want EasyQOS to be enabled)</font>
   * `POST /policy/tag/association`
3. Select one or more applications to be used in the policy. Create a custom application, if needed.
   * `POST /application`
4. Create and Apply Policy.
   * `POST /policy`


## Task 2 - Policy scopes - Attach the policy tag to the network devices where you want EasyQOS to be enabled

Policy Scopes is the group of devices to configure with the policy. In this step, you need to know the following:
* Which devices will be included.
* The network device ID to associate with the devices.
* Which policy tag to use.

In this case, use the policy tag you created in Step 1. Now that you have these two minimum attributes, you are ready to create a JSON object for `POST /policy/tag/association`

```
{
    "policyTag":"name of policy tag",
    "networkDevices":[{"deviceId":"put the network device id here"}]
}
```


### Source code recap

1. Use `GET '/network-device'` to build a list of IP address/device names.
2. Prompt the user to select a network device from a list.
3. Use `GET '/policy/tag'` to build a Policy Tag list.
4. Prompt the user to select a Policy Tag.
5. Use `POST '/policy/tag/association'` to tag a device:<br>

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>
  * On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py`<br>
  * On Windows: `py -3 lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py` or `python lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py`<br>

**Code listing : `lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab2-1-post-policy-tag-association.py
Tag a selected policy tag on selected network device
"""

from apicem import * # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

def select_device_id(ap):
    """
    This function returns a network device id that the user selected from a list.
    Exit the script if there is no network device.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): The apic-em object that defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    str: The network device id
    """

    device=[]
    # Create a list of network devices
    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="network-device")
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        device = response_json["response"] # The network-device
    except:
        print ("Something wrong, cannot get network device information")
        sys.exit()

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s,Something wrong !"%status)
        print (resp.text)
        sys.exit()

    if device == []:
        print ("Oops! No device was found ! Discover network device first.")
        sys.exit()

    device_list = []
    # Extracting attributes and add a counter to an iterable
    idx=0
    for item in device:
        idx+=1
        device_list.append([idx,item["hostname"],item["managementIpAddress"],item["type"],item["instanceUuid"]])
    if device_list == []:
        print ("There is no network device to associate with policy tag !")
        sys.exit()
    # Pretty print tabular data, needs 'tabulate' module
    print (tabulate(device_list, headers=['number','hostname','ip','type'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    # Ask user's selection
    # Find out network device with selected ip address or hostname. index 4 is the network device id
    # Stay in the loop until 'id' is assigned or user enter 'exit'
    net_id = ""
    device_id_idx = 4 # Network device ip index in the list
    while True:
        user_input = input('Select a number for the device from the list to add policy tag: ')
        user_input= user_input.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if user_input.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if user_input.isdigit(): # Make sure user's input in in range
            if int(user_input) in range(1,len(device_list)+1):
                net_id = device_list[int(user_input)-1][device_id_idx] # The device_id_idx is the position of id
                return net_id
            else:
                print ("Oops! number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! input is not a digit. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

######## select a policy tag to associate with device ##########

def select_policy_tag(ap):
    """
    This function returns the policy tag that the user selected from a list.
    Exit script if there is no policy tag.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): The apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    str: policy tag
    """

    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="policy/tag") # get policy tag
        response_json = resp.json()
        tag = response_json["response"] # policy tags
    except:
        print ("Something wrong, cannot get host policy tag")
    if tag ==[] :
        print ("No policy tag was found, create policy tag first !")
        sys.exit()
    i=0
    tag_list = []
    for item in tag:
        i+=1
        tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"]])
    print (tabulate(tag_list, headers=['#','Policy Tag'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')
    pTag=""
    # Request user input.
    # Stay in the loop until tag is selected or user selects 'exit'.
    while True:
        tag_num = input('=> Select a number for the tag from the list: ')
        tag_num = tag_num.lstrip() # ignore leading space
        if tag_num.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if tag_num.isdigit(): # make sure digit is entered
            if int(tag_num) in range(1,len(tag)+1): # make sure digit entered is in range
                pTag=tag[int(tag_num)-1]["policyTag"]
                return pTag
            else:
                print ("Oops! number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! input is not a digit. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

def post_association(ap,tag,n_id):
    """
    This function tags a selected network device with a selected policy tag.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): The apic-em object that defined in apicem.py
    tag (str): The policy tag
    n_id (str): The network device id

    Return:
    -------
    None
    """

    # JSON for POST /policy/tag/association
    r_json = {
        "policyTag":tag,
        "networkDevices":[{"deviceId":n_id}]
    }
    # POST "/policy/tag/association" API
    try:
        resp = ap.post(api="policy/tag/association",data=r\_json,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("\nSomething is wrong when running POST /policy/tag/association")

############################## main #######################################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance, taking all defaults from apicem_config.py
    net_id = select_device_id(myapicem) # getting network device id
    tag = select_policy_tag(myapicem) # getting policy tag
    post_association(myapicem,tag,net_id) # create association

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/network-device'

GET 'network-device' Status:  200

========  =============================  =============  ==============================================
  number  hostname                       ip             type
========  =============================  =============  ==============================================
       1  AHEC-2960C1                    165.10.1.39    Cisco Catalyst 2960C-8PC-L Switch
       2  AP7081.059f.19ca               10.1.14.3      Cisco 3500I Unified Access Point
       3  Branch-Access1                 10.2.1.17      Cisco Catalyst 29xx Stack-able Ethernet Switch
       4  Branch-Router1                 10.2.2.1       Cisco 2911 Integrated Services Router G2
       5  Branch-Router2                 10.2.2.2       Cisco 2911 Integrated Services Router G2
       6  Branch2-Router.yourdomain.com  218.1.100.100  Cisco 2911 Integrated Services Router G2
       7  CAMPUS-Access1                 10.1.12.1      Cisco Catalyst 3850-48U-E Switch
       8  CAMPUS-Core1                   10.1.7.1       Cisco Catalyst 6503 Switch
       9  CAMPUS-Core2                   10.1.10.1      Cisco Catalyst 6503 Switch
      10  CAMPUS-Dist1                   10.255.1.5     Cisco Catalyst 4507R plus E Switch
      11  CAMPUS-Dist2                   10.1.11.1      Cisco Catalyst 4507R plus E Switch
      12  CAMPUS-Router1                 10.1.2.1       Cisco 4451 Series Integrated Services Router
      13  CAMPUS-Router2                 10.1.4.2       Cisco 4451 Series Integrated Services Router
      14  Campus-WLC-5508                10.1.14.2      Cisco 5508 Wireless LAN Controller
========  =============================  =============  ==============================================

Select a number for the device from the list to add policy tag: 3

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag'

GET 'policy/tag' Status:  200

===  ============
  #  Policy Tag
===  ============
  1  Branch
  2  lab_tag
  3  ed-qos
  4  devnet_tag
===  ============

=> Select a number for the tag from the list: 4

Executing POST 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag/association'

POST 'policy/tag/association' Status:  202

Response:
 {
    "response": {
        "taskId": "e285345d-b0b6-4cf4-953e-d8ce72276b0f",
        "url": "/api/v1/task/e285345d-b0b6-4cf4-953e-d8ce72276b0f"
    },
    "version": "1.0"
}
</code></pre>
</details>

###  <font color='red'>Note: To check if the association is created you can run `lab2-2-get-policy-tag-association.py` script to find out.</font>

## Next step

Proceed to Step 4: Create custom NBAR2 application.
