# Step 4: Create custom NBAR2 application

## Policy elements

* **Policy Scope** — A group of devices with the same policy tag that are configured with the policy.

* <font color='red'>**Applications** — Software programs or network signaling protocols that are used in your network. EasyQoS includes the Cisco Network-Based Application Recognition, a second generation (NBAR2) application library containing approximately 1400 distinct applications and sub-applications. In this session, you create a custom application to be used for creating policy.</font>

* **Traffic Classes** — Groups of applications that make configuring policies easier, because the groups contain applications that have similar traffic needs.

* **Business-relevance** — An attribute that classifies a given application according to how relevant it is to your business and operations. The attributes are business relevant, default, and business irrelevant


## Objectives

Learn how to use the EasyQoS related APIs to create an application.

Use the following steps to create a policy using APIC-EM APIs:


1. Create Policy Tag
   * `POST /policy/tag`
2. Attach policy tags to network devices for policy scope (where you want EasyQOS to be enabled)
   * `POST /policy/tag/association`
3. <font color='red'>Select one or more applications to be used in a policy. Create a custom application, if needed.</font>
   * `POST /application`
4. Create and Apply Policy.
   * `POST /policy`


## Task 3 - Select the NBAR2 application or create a custom NBAR2 application
You could select applications to create policy, but you want to show the minimum amount of information needed to create a custom application.
For more information about NBAR2, see [NBAR2 or Next Generation NBAR](http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/ios-nx-os-software/network-based-application-recognition-nbar/qa_c67-697963.html)

Example of a JSON object for `POST /application`.

For more information, see the [APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

```
[{"trafficClass":"BULK_DATA",
  "helpString":testApp,
  "name":testApp,
  "appProtocol": "tcp/udp",
  "udpPorts": "8888",
  "tcpPorts": "8888",
  "pfrThresholdJitter":1,
  "pfrThresholdLossRate":50,
  "pfrThresholdOneWayDelay":500,
  "pfrThresholdJitterPriority":1,
  "pfrThresholdLossRatePriority":2,
  "pfrThresholdOneWayDelayPriority":3,
  "category":"other",
  "subCategory":"other",
  "categoryId":"",
  "longDescription": "custom application",
  "ignoreConflict":True
}]
```


### Source code recap
1. Load the JSON object for the `POST /application` API.
2.  <font color='red'>Get the category id according to the category name in the JSON object.</font>
3. Prompt the user to enter the application name.
4. Populate the JSON object, based on user input.
5. Run the POST request<br>.

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab3-1-post-application.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>
  * On Linux or macOS:  `python3 lab3-1-post-application.py`<br>
  * On Windows: `py -3 lab3-1-post-application.py` or `python lab3-1-post-application.py`<br>

When you try out this code, in addition to using a unique application name, you should also change other parameters, such as port number and category Id, to prevent resource conflicts.<br>

**Code listing : `lab3-1-post-application.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab3-1-post-application.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab3-1-post-application.py
Create an application
"""

from apicem import \* # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

def post_app(ap,app_json):
    """
    This function creates an application

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): The apic-em object defined in apicem.py
    app_json(JSON): The JSON object for POST /application

    Return:
    -------
    None
    """

    ########## Get category id ##########
    # You need the category id in the JSON response from the `POST /application` API.
    # Get this id dynamically because the ids change when the DB is initialized.

    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="category") # The response (result) from "GET 'category" request
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        categories = response_json["response"] # category
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get category information")
        sys.exit()
    # Find the category id for the category name used in JSON
    for item in categories:
        if item["name"] == app_json["category"]:
            app_json["categoryId"] = item["id"]

    # Populate the JSON object with user input
    app_json["helpString"] = pApp
    app_json["name"] = pApp
    app_json["ignoreConflict"] = True

    # Important: Convert this to a list because the API requires one
    app_json = [app_json]

    # POST application url
    try:
        resp = ap.post(api="application",data=app\_json,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong with the POST /application !")

##########################################################################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    # Create a JSON object for the  POST request

    app_json = {
        "trafficClass":"BULK_DATA",
        "helpString":"",
        "name":"",
        "appProtocol": "tcp/udp",
        "udpPorts": "8888",
        "tcpPorts": "8888",
        "pfrThresholdJitter":1,
        "pfrThresholdLossRate":50,
        "pfrThresholdOneWayDelay":500,
        "pfrThresholdJitterPriority":1,
        "pfrThresholdLossRatePriority":2,
        "pfrThresholdOneWayDelayPriority":3,
        "category":"other",
        "subCategory":"other",
        "categoryId":"",
        "longDescription": "custom application",
        "ignoreConflict":True
        }

    ########## Prompt the user to enter the application name ##########
    # Stay in the loop until input is not null or is 'exit'

    while True:
        print ("** The name must include only letters, numbers, underscores, and hyphens, with no spaces between words **")
        pApp = input('=> Enter application name that you want to create: ')
        pApp = pApp.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if pApp.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if pApp == "":
            print ("Oops! The application name cannot be NULL. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            break
    # Everything is OK so far. Initialize apicem instance and create application
    myapicem = apicem()
    post_app(myapicem,app_json)
</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
** The name must include only letters, numbers, underscores, and hyphens, with no spaces between words **
=> Enter the application name that you want to create: devnet_app

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/category'

GET 'category' Status:  200


Executing POST 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/application'

POST 'application' Status:  202

Response:
 {
    "version": "1.0",
    "response": {
        "taskId": "8c42e078-f8c0-42f8-96b9-5f5402cff4fa",
        "url": "/api/v1/task/8c42e078-f8c0-42f8-96b9-5f5402cff4fa"
    }
}
</code></pre>
</details>

You can check the results in the UI or by calling  `GET /application` (See `lab3-2-get-custom-application.py`). Ordinarily, this might take a while because APIC-EM includes approximately 1400 distinct applications. However, there is a filter available in the `GET /application` API. If you set the parameter `{"isCustom":True}` in this GET request, it should quickly return only custom applications.

## Next step

Proceed to Step 5: Preview policy.
