# Step 6: Create and apply policy

Creating and applying policy is the last step of creating policy.

## Policy elements

* **Policy Scope** — A group of devices with the same policy tag that are configured with the policy.

* **Applications** — Software programs or network signaling protocols that are used in your network. EasyQoS includes the Cisco Network-Based Application Recognition, a second generation (NBAR2) application library containing approximately 1400 distinct applications and sub-applications. In this session, you create a custom application to be used for creating policy.

* **Traffic Classes** — Groups of applications that make configuring policies easier, because the groups contain applications that have similar traffic needs.

* **Business-relevance** — An attribute that classifies a given application according to how relevant it is to your business and operations. The attribute value can be business relevant, default, or business irrelevant.


## Objectives

Learn how to use the EasyQoS related APIs to create policy.

You will use the following steps to create policy using APIC-EM APIs

1. Create Policy Tag
   * `POST /policy/tag`
2. Attach policy tags to network devices for policy scope (where you want EasyQOS to be enabled)
   * `POST /policy/tag/association`
3. Select one or more applications to be used in a policy. Create a custom application, if needed.
   * `POST /application`
4. <font color='red'>Create and Apply Policy.</font>
   * `POST /policy`


## Task 4 - Create and apply policy
In the first three lab sessions, you obtained the policy scope and application. Now you have enough input to create a policy.

<font color='red'>Please note that in this session you only show you how to create policy. Because you are using the DB-only lab and not validating the parameters in a NBAR application, a policy will be created, but you won't be able to apply it to a device.</font>

Example of JSON object for `POST /policy`. This is similar to preview policy JSON without "networkDeviceIds" and "state" attributes.

For more information, see the
[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)


```
[{
    "policyName": "testPolicy",
    "policyOwner": "admin",
    "policyPriority": 4095,
    "resource": {
      "applications": [   
          {
            "appName": "testApp",
            "id": "ce6dc820-c2b5-456d-b648-5cf559e794b7"
          }]
    },
    "actions": [
        "SET_PROPERTY"
    ],
    "policyScope": "test_Policy_tag",
    "actionProperty": {
        "relevanceLevel": "Business-Relevant"
    }
}]
```
### Source code recap

1. Prompt the user to enter a policy name.
2. Prompt the user to select a policy tag.
3. Prompt the user to select an application.
4. Create the policy. <br>

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab5-1-post-policy.py`<br>
* To run the Python file, enter:
    * On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab5-1-post-policy.py`<br>
    * On Windows: `py -3 lab5-1-post-policy.py` or `python lab5-1-post-policy.py`<br>

**Code listing : `lab5-1-post-policy.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab5-1-post-policy.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab5-1-post-policy.py
Create a policy
"""

from apicem import \* # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

########### Ask user to enter a policy name ##############
# Stay in the loop until input is not null or is 'exit'
def enter_policy_name(ap):
    """
    This function takes user input as policy name and checks if the name is used
    If the name is not used, it returns the user's input

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    str : policy name
    """
    check_name = True
    while check_name:
        policy_name = input('=> Enter policy name that you like to create: ')
        policy_name = policy_name.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if policy_name.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if policy_name == "":
            print ("Oops! Policy name cannot be NULL. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else: # Check if name is used
            check_name = False
            try:
                resp= ap.get(api="policy") # The response (result) from "GET /policy" request
                response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
                policy = response_json["response"]
            except:
                print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get policy information")
                sys.exit()
            for item in policy:
                if policy_name == item["policyName"]:
                    print ("This policy name exists. Please try a different name !")
                    check_name = True
                    break
    return policy_name

########### Prompt the user to select a policy Business-Relevance ##############

def select_relevance():
    """
    This function lists policy business relevance for user to select and
    returns a list  related to the user's selection - [relevancy_select[?],relevancy_tag[?]]

    Parameters
    ----------
    None

    Return:
    -------
    list : [relevanceLevel,relevanceTag]
    """
    relevancy_select = [[1,'Business-Relevant'],[2,'Business-Irrelevant'],[3,'Default']]
    relevancy_tag = ['-BR','-IR','-D']
    print (tabulate(relevancy_select, headers=['#','Policy Business Relevancy'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    relevanceLevel = 'Default'
    # In the loop until tag is selected or user select 'exit'
    while True:
        tag_num = input('=> Enter a number from the list shown for policy Business Relevancy: ')
        tag_num = tag_num.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if tag_num.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if tag_num.isdigit():
            if int(tag_num) in range(1,len(relevancy_select)+1):
                relevanceTag = relevancy_tag[int(tag_num)-1]
                relevanceLevel = relevancy_select[int(tag_num)-1][1]
                break
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

    return [relevanceLevel,relevanceTag]

def get_tag_association(ap):
    """
    This function print out all network devices have policy tag
    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    list: tag list
    """
    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="policy/tag/association")
        response_json = resp.json()
        tag = response_json["response"] # Policy tags
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while getting the policy tag !")
        sys.exit()

    # If there is a policy tag, the response will show what network device is tagged
    if tag ==[]:
        print ("No Policy tag is found")
        sys.exit()
    else:
        tag_list = []
        i=0
        for item in tag:
            if "policyTag" in item:
                if item["networkDevices"] != []: # If there is at least one network device associated
                    for item1 in item["networkDevices"]: # There could be more than one network device associated with the same tag
                        i+=1
                        # Adding number in the beginning of each row
                        tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"],item1["deviceName"],item1["deviceIp"],item1["deviceId"]])
                else:
                    i+=1
                    tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"],"","",""])
        if tag_list == []:
            print ("No policy tag association is found, so there is nothing to show")
            sys.exit()
    return (tag_list)

########### Prompt user to select a policy tag name ##############
def select_tag(ap):
    """
    This function let user to select a policy tag

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    str : policy tag
    """
    tag_list= get_tag_association(ap)
    print (tabulate(tag_list, headers=['#','Policy Tag associated with','Device Name','Device IP','Device ID'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    # Stay in the loop until a tag is selected or user selects 'exit'
    tag_name_idx = 1
    nd_id_idx = 4
    while True:
        tag_num = input('=> Select a policy tag that is associated with network device : ')
        tag_num = tag_num.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if tag_num.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if tag_num.isdigit():
            if int(tag_num) in range(1,len(tag_list)+1):
                nd_id = tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][nd_id_idx]
                if nd_id == "":
                    print ("Oops! This policy tag is not associated with any network device. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
                else:
                    tag_name = tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][tag_name_idx]
                    break
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop
    return tag_name

########## Select an application and retrieve its id #################
def select_app(ap):
    """
    This function lists applications for user to select and
    returns a list with application name and application id

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): The apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    list : [app_name,app_id]
    """

    print ("** Retrieving applications may take a while. Please wait......... **\n")
    app = []
    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="application") # The response (result) from "GET /application" request
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        app = response_json["response"]
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get application information")
        sys.exit()

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s. Something is wrong !"%status)
        sys.exit()

    # Make sure there is at least one application
    if app == []:
        print ("Something went wrong while retrieving applications!")
        sys.exit()

    app_list = []
    # Extracting attributes
    for item in app:
         app_list.append([item["name"],item["instanceUuid"]])
    # Show all NBAR2 applications
    # Pretty print tabular data, needs 'tabulate' module

    print ("-------------  All default applications -------------")
    print (tabulate(app_list, headers=['application','id'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    app = []
    params={"isCustom":True}
    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="application",params=params) # The response (result) from "GET /application" request
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        app = response_json["response"]
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get application information")
        sys.exit()

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s. Something is wrong !"%status)
        sys.exit()

    # Make sure there is at least one custom application
    if app == []:
        print ("** There is no custom application. Select one from default ! **\n")
    else:
        short_list = []
        # Extracting attributes
        for item in app:
            short_list.append([item["name"],item["instanceUuid"]])
        print ("*************  All custom applications *************")
        print (tabulate(short_list, headers=['custom application','id'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    # Prompt user to select an application in order to retrieve its id
    # Stay in the loop until 'id' is assigned or user selects 'exit'

    app_id = ""
    select = True
    while select:
        app_name = input('=> Enter one of the application names shown(default or custom,case-sensitive) to create policy: ')
        app_name = app_name.lstrip() # Ignore leading space
        if app_name.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        for item in app_list:
            if app_name == item[0]: # if user_input(application name) is matched
                app_id = item[1]    # index 1 is the application id
                select = False
                break
        if app_id == "":
            print ("Oops! That application was not found. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

    return [app_name,app\_id]

##########################################################################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance
    policy_name = enter_policy_name(myapicem) # First, enter policy name
    relevance = select_relevance()
    relevanceLevel = relevance[0]
    # policy_name = policy_name + relevance[1] # append relevance abbreviation to the policy name
    tag_name = select_tag(myapicem) # select a policy tag
    app = select_app(myapicem) # select an application
    app_name = app[0]
    app_id = app[1]

    # JSON object for POST /policy
    #  "SET_PROPERTY"
    policy_json = [{
    "policyName": policy_name,
    "policyOwner": "devnetuser",
    "policyPriority": 4095,
    "resource": {
        "applications": [{
            "appName": app_name,
            "id": app_id
        }]
    },
    "actions":[
          "SET_PROPERTY"
    ],
    "policyScope": tag_name,
    "actionProperty": {
        "relevanceLevel": relevanceLevel
        }
    }]

    ########## Creating policy #############
    print ("\nCreating policy with a single application.........\n")
    try:
        myapicem.post(api="policy", data=policy_json,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("Something wrong with POST policy")
        sys.exit()
</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
=> Enter the policy name that you want to create: devnet_policy

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy'

GET 'policy' Status:  200

===  ===========================
  #  Policy Business Relevancy
===  ===========================
  1  Business-Relevant
  2  Business-Irrelevant
  3  Default
===  ===========================

=> Enter a number from the list shown to select a policy Business Relevancy: 1

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag/association'

GET 'policy/tag/association' Status:  200

===  ============================  ==============  ===========  ====================================
  #  Policy Tag associated with    Device Name     Device IP    Deice ID
===  ============================  ==============  ===========  ====================================
  1  Branch                        Branch-Access1  10.2.1.17    26450a30-57d8-4b56-b8f1-6fc535d67645
  2  Branch                        CAMPUS-Core2    10.1.10.1    1b329f52-95eb-44ad-9314-55932162ab86
  3  Branch                        CAMPUS-Core1    10.1.7.1     30d39b18-9ada-4148-ad6c-2ee20975b845
  4  Branch                        CAMPUS-Dist2    10.1.11.1    4af8bf34-295f-46f4-97b7-0a2d2ea4cf22
  5  Branch                        CAMPUS-Access1  10.1.12.1    5b5ea8da-8c23-486a-b95e-7429684d25fc
  6  lab_tag
  7  ed-qos
  8  devnet_tag                    Branch-Router1  10.2.2.1     0dd240fd-5cca-4774-a801-9f1c04edcc70
===  ============================  ==============  ===========  ====================================

=> Select a policy tag that is associated with network device : 8
** Retrieving applications may take a while. Please wait......... **


Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/application'

GET 'application' Status:  200

-------------  All default applications -------------
=============================  ====================================
application                    id
=============================  ====================================
applix                         002f18e4-9bb9-443d-bf41-fd7d22e858ed
..................................
..................................

=============================  ====================================

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/application'

GET 'application' Status:  200

*************  All custom applications *************
====================  ====================================
custom application    id
====================  ====================================
devnet_app            d3a4b24c-5f71-451a-8578-45b4ef9ee324
====================  ====================================

=> Enter one of the application names shown(default or custom,case-sensitive) to create policy: devnet_app

Creating policy with a single application.........


Executing POST 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy'

POST 'policy' Status:  202

Response:
 {
    "response": {
        "url": "/api/v1/task/403d15cc-0be9-4622-a091-5aba5c0c0bcc",
        "taskId": "403d15cc-0be9-4622-a091-5aba5c0c0bcc"
    },
    "version": "1.0"
}
</code></pre>
</details>

To check if policy was created, you can use the following code. Please note that this only tells you policy was created or not. It does not tell you if the policy was applied and activated.

* Source code file: lab5-2-get-policy.py
* To run the Python file, enter:
	* On Linux or macOS:  `python3 lab5-2-get-policy.py`
	* On Windows: `py -3 lab5-2-get-policy.py` or `python lab5-2-get-policy.py`

**Code listing : `lab5-2-get-policy.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab5-2-get-policy.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab5-2-get-policy.py
Get all policy
"""

from apicem import *  # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py


def get_policy(ap):
    """
    This function prints out all policies

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    None
    """

    # policy list
    policy = []
    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="policy") # The response (result) from "GET /policy" request
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        policy = response_json["response"] # network-device
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get policy information")
        sys.exit()  

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s. Something is wrong !"%status)
        print (resp.text)
        sys.exit()

    # Make sure there is at least one policy

    if policy == [] :
        print ("No policy was found !")
        sys.exit()
    # if response is not empty
    policy_list = []
    # Extracting attributes
    for item in policy:
        policy_list.append([item["policyName"],item["instanceUuid"]])
    # Show all policies
    # Pretty print tabular data, needs 'tabulate' module
    print (tabulate(policy\_list, headers=['policy','id'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

##########################################################################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance, taking all defaults from apicem_config.py
    get_policy(myapicem)
</code></pre>
</details>


<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy'

GET 'policy' Status:  200

==============================  ====================================
policy                          id
==============================  ====================================
BUSINESS_IRRELEVANT_CVD_Policy  1fdc7959-d43f-4749-ba7b-5d9424e55e61
Greg-Branch-Policy-BR           2588e196-45ad-4033-bb1d-984f12ffefa5
BUSINESS_RELEVANT_CVD_Policy    473c31c3-7d2a-41e3-8b2e-61101a178fa9
default-IR                      53dd88df-4749-4cf9-8dd3-494b6cae5cde
DEFAULT_CVD_Policy              5a624bef-a3c8-4dd2-af0d-48d140c65358
Greg-Branch-Policy-IR           86a717cc-e087-4d1f-bde2-d66fa6bd3d8d
devnet_policy                   9cf9ec9b-5259-4333-93fe-b9103839d466
Greg-Branch-Policy-D            b476d804-b60d-45e5-a741-bdc42c22cfb0
default-D                       d043da6e-b0d8-471f-9e62-efe8fa8c4ece
default-BR                      da80a65a-8851-4cbe-9ac1-b4b396fbf277
==============================  ====================================
</code></pre>
</details>

## Next step

Proceed to Step 7: Delete policy, custom NBAR2 application, policy tag association, and policy tag.
