# Step 7: Delete policy, custom NBAR2 application, policy tag association, and policy tag

You've created a custom NBAR2 application or a policy from the UI or API, and now you want to delete it. Remember, in previous labs you created a policy using the following steps:

1. Create Policy Tag.
   * `POST /policy/tag`
2. Attach policy tags to network devices for policy scope (where you want EasyQoS to be enabled).
   * `POST /policy/tag/association`
3. Select one or more applications to be used in policy and create a custom one, if needed. (Creating a custom application is optional)
   * `POST /application`
4. Create and Apply Policy.
   * `POST /policy`

In this session, you learn how to undo steps shown. The process are similar to a "Last In First Out" stack operation. You start by deleting the policy.

1. Delete Policy.
   - `DELETE /policy`
2. Delete custom application(s) used in the policy.
   - `DELETE /application` (optional)
3. Delete association between tags and network devices.
   - `DELETE /policy/tag/association`
4. Delete Policy Tag.
   - `DELETE /policy/tag`  

## Objectives

Learn how to delete a policy, custom NBAR2 application, policy tag association, and policy tag.

The `DELETE` APIs appear simple, but deleting policies or applications is not straightforward because of APIC-EM default NBAR2 applications because of the way the policy is created. This session points out what to pay attention to when using these APIs.

## Delete policy
<font color='red'>BUSINESS\_RELEVANT\_CVD\_Policy,DEFAULT\_CVD\_Policy and BUSINESS\_IRRELEVANT\_CVD\_Policy are default policies and cannot be deleted.</font>   

### Source code recap

1. Use "GET /policy" API to list all policies.
2. User selects a policy to delete using "DELETE /policy" API.

#### Code -- `DELETE /policy`

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab6-1-delete-policy.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>

	* On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab6-1-delete-policy.py`<br>
	* On Windows: `py -3 lab6-1-delete-policy.py` or `python lab6-1-delete-policy.py`<br>


**Code listing : `lab6-1-delete-policy.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab6-1-delete-policy.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab6-1-delete-policy.py
Delete a policy
"""

from apicem import * # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

def select_policy(ap):
    """
    This function prompts the user to select a policy from a list

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    list : [policy_name,policy_id]
    """       
    policy = [] # policy list
    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="policy") # "GET /policy" request
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        policy = response_json["response"]
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get policy information")
        sys.exit()  

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s. Something is wrong!" %status)
        print (resp.text)
        sys.exit()

    # Make sure there is at least one policy
    if policy != [] :   # if response is not empty
        policy_list = []
        # Extracting attributes
        for i,item in enumerate(policy):
            policy_list.append([i+1,item["policyName"],item["instanceUuid"]])
        # Show all policies
        # Pretty print tabular data using 'tabulate' module
        print (tabulate(policy_list, headers=["#",'policy','id'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')
    else:
        print ("No policy was found !")
        sys.exit()

    print ("!!! BUSINESS_RELEVANT_CVD_Policy,DEFAULT_CVD_Policy,BUSINESS_IRRELEVANT_CVD_Policy !!!")
    print ("!!!                  These are default policies cannot be deleted                  !!!")
    print ("--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------")

        ######## select a policy and return policy name and policy id #######
    # Ask user's input
    # Stay in the loop until 'policy id' is assigned or user entered 'exit'

    name_idx = 1 # policy name index in the list
    id_idx = 2   # policy id index in the list
    while True:
        user_input = input('=> Select a number for the policy to delete:' )
        user_input= user_input.replace(" ","") # ignore space
        if user_input.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if user_input.isdigit():
            if int(user_input) in range(1,len(policy_list)+1):
                policy_name = policy_list[int(user_input)-1][name_idx]
                policy_id = policy_list[int(user_input)-1][id_idx]
                return [policy_name,policy\_id] # return value of this function
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

### Delete Policy ###

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance
    policy_info=select_policy(myapicem)
    print ("Deleting",policy_info[0],"....") # policy_info[0] = policy_name
    try:
        myapicem.delete(api="policy/"+policy_info[1],printOut=True) # policy_info[1] = policy_id
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while deleting policy")
        sys.exit()  

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
status:  200
========  ==============================  ====================================
  number  policy                          id
========  ==============================  ====================================
       1  DEFAULT_CVD_Policy              18cfbf01-e093-498c-9e4e-f6066ebbddeb
       2  test_policy-BR                  4a4d45ab-b81c-4695-bda4-8873420bf2af
       3  MEditech-BR                     583d31f6-bd62-4809-970f-b095d3600cea
       4  MEditech-IR                     62eab521-576d-439e-8be4-1358c1b7ba89
       5  MEditech-D                      8ad0d5aa-ac71-4c4f-b98c-ed6db86b3d14
       6  BUSINESS_RELEVANT_CVD_Policy    93e36769-ae5a-4e9c-aef5-3c0e78580839
       7  BUSINESS_IRRELEVANT_CVD_Policy  d968c5c4-eb61-4cd2-994d-fe5bb6d31423
========  ==============================  ====================================

!!! BUSINESS_RELEVANT_CVD_Policy,DEFAULT_CVD_Policy,BUSINESS_IRRELEVANT_CVD_Policy !!!
!!! These are default policies and cannot be deleted !!!
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
=> Select a number for the policy to delete:2
Deleting test_policy-BR ....
status:  202
Response: {
    "version": "1.0",
    "response": {
        "url": "/api/v1/task/6cd7d2bd-f2e0-4aa1-820c-69565b234b20",
        "taskId": "6cd7d2bd-f2e0-4aa1-820c-69565b234b20"
    }
}
</code></pre>
</details>

### Delete custom NBAR2 application

The API for deleting NBAR2 application is `delete /application/{id}`. You can use `GET /application` to list all applications, find out the application name you want to delete, then retrieve its id. However, APIC-EM normally includes thousands of default NBAR2 applications. This would make it difficult to find the custom application that you created.<br>

Instead, you can list custom applications only. To do that, you set the parameter {"isCustom":True} in the `GET /application` request so that it returns only custom applications.

#### Source code recap

1. Use "GET /application" API with {"isCustom":True} filter to create a list.
2. Print out the custom application list.
3. Prompt the user to select an application from the list.
4. Delete the user-selected application.

#### Code -- `DELETE /application`  (custom application)
[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

In this code, you only retrieve the custom applications for the user to select for deletion.<br>

* Source code file: `lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>

	*  On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py`<br>
	*  On Windows: `py -3 lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py` or `python lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py`<br>

**Code listing : `lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab6-2-delete-custom-application.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab6-2-delete-application.py
Delete a custom application
"""

from apicem import \* # APIC-EM IP assigned in apicem_config.py

#### Select a custom application from the list and return its id

def select_application(ap):
    """
    This function prompts the user to select a custom application from a list

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in `apicem.py`

    Return:
    -------
    str : custom application id
    """    

    app = []
    params={"isCustom":True} # filter, only retrieve custom application
    try:
        resp= ap.get(api="application",params=params) # The response (result) from "GET /application" request
        status = resp.status_code
        response_json = resp.json() # Get the json-encoded content from response
        app = response_json["response"]
    except:
        print ("Something is wrong. Cannot get application information")
        sys.exit()  

    if status != 200:
        print ("Response status %s. Something is wrong !"%status)
        sys.exit()

    custom_app = []
    if app != [] :   # if response is not empty
        # Extracting attributes
        idx=0
        for item in app:
            idx+=1 # adding numbers in the list
            custom_app.append([idx,item["name"],item["id"]])
        # Show all custom applications
        # Pretty print tabular data, needs 'tabulate' module

    if custom_app == []:
        print ("There is no custom NBAR2 application, so there is nothing to delete !")
        sys.exit()
    else:
        name_list=[]   # List of all custom application names
        app_in_policy=[] # list of all all custom applications which are used by policy
        for item in custom_app:
            name_list.append(item[1])
        # Iterate through all polices to find out if custom application is used
        resp= ap.get(api="policy")
        policy = resp.json()["response"]
        for item in policy:
            if "resource" in item:
                for item1 in item["resource"]["applications"]:
                    if item1["appName"] in name_list:
                        app_in_policy.append([item1["appName"],item["policyName"]])
        # Here, you check if there are applications used by policy
        # If there are applications used the you won't be able to delete
        i = 0
        policy_name_idx=2
        # Iterate custom application list
        for item in custom_app:
            match = False
            # Go Through 'in use' applications and insert policy name in position 2 of the list
            for item1 in app_in_policy:
                print (item[1])
                if item[1] in item1:
                    match = True
                    policy_name=item1[1]
                    break
            if match:
                custom_app[i].insert(policy_name_idx,policy_name)
            else:
                custom_app[i].insert(policy_name_idx,"") # leave it blank if it is not used by any policy
                i=i+1
        print ("******** If application is used by a policy it cannot be deleted ! *************")
        print (tabulate(custom_app, headers=['number','custom application','used by policy'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    ######## Now prompt user to select an application and delete it #######
    # Prompt for the user's input
    # Stay in the loop until 'id' is assigned or user selects 'exit'
    app_id = ""
    id_idx = 3 # #custom_app id is in position 3
    while True:
        user_input = input('=> Select a number for the application to delete:' )
        user_input= user_input.replace(" ","") # ignore space
        if user_input.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if user_input.isdigit():
            if int(user_input) in range(1,len(custom_app)+1):
                app_id = custom_app[int(user_input)-1][id_idx] #custom_app id is in position 3
                return app\_id
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

#### Delete application ####

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance
    app_id=select_application(myapicem)  # get custom application id
    try:
        myapicem.delete(api="application/"+app_id,printOut=True) # Delete application by application id
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while deleting the application")
        sys.exit()

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
** Retrieving applications may take a while. Please wait......... **

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/application'

status:  200

Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy'

******** If application is used by a policy it cannot be deleted ! *************
========  ====================  ================
  number  custom application    used by policy
========  ====================  ================
       1  new_app
========  ====================  ================

=> Enter a number to select an application to delete:1
status:  202
Response: {
    "response": {
        "url": "/api/v1/task/73a4359d-27c9-4b47-8fc3-76297802402b",
        "taskId": "73a4359d-27c9-4b47-8fc3-76297802402b"
    },
    "version": "1.0"
}
</code></pre>
</details>

### Delete policy tag association

This is to undo `POST /policy/tag/association`. You cannot delete a policy tag that is currently associated with a network device. Before deleting the policy tag, you need to check the policy tag association (GET policy/tag/association).<br>
The API for deleting policy tag association is `DELETE /policy/tag/association`.
This DELETE request, however, is different from the simple DELETE request. You also need to pass two parameters: `policyTag` and `deviceId`. The value of these two can be obtained from `GET policy/tag/association`.

#### Source code recap

1. Use the `GET /policy/tag/association` API to create a list.
2. Print the policy tag association list.
3. Prompt the user to select a tag association from the list.
4. Retrieve the value of `policyTag` and `deviceId` based on the user's selection.
5. Apply `DELETE /policy/tag/association` API with the two parameters.

#### Code -- `DELETE /policy/tag/association`

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>
  * On Linux or macOS: `python3 lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py`<br>
	* On Windows: `py -3 lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py` or `python lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py`<br>


**Code listing : `lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab6-3-delete-policy-tag-association.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: lab6-3-delete-tag-association.py
Delete a tag association
"""

from apicem import *  # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py

def select_tag_association(ap):
    """
    This function prompts the user to select a tag association from a list

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    list :  [tag_to_delete,device_id_to_delete]
    """   
    # Get policy tag association

    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="policy/tag/association")
        response_json = resp.json()
        tag = response_json["response"] # policy tag association
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while getting the policy tag !")
        sys.exit()
    tag_list = []
    i=0
    for item in tag:
        if "policyTag" in item:
            if item["networkDevices"] != []:
                for item1 in item["networkDevices"]:
                    i+=1
                    tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"],item1["deviceName"],item1["deviceIp"],item1["deviceId"]])
    if tag_list ==[]:
        print ("No policy tag association was found, so there is nothing to delete")
        sys.exit()

    print ("The following are network devices that have policy tags")              
    print (tabulate(tag_list, headers=['#','Policy Tag associated with','Device Name','Device IP'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')


    # Prompt for the user's input
    # Stay in the loop until a tag is selected or user selects 'exit'
    tag_to_delete=""
    device_id_to_delete=""
    while True:
        tag_num = input('=> Enter a number from the list shown to delete a policy tag association: ')
        tag_num = tag_num.replace(" ","") # ignore space
        if tag_num.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if tag_num.isdigit():
            if int(tag_num) in range(1,len(tag_list)+1):
                tag_to_delete=tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][1]
                device_id_to_delete=tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][4]
                break
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

    if tag_to_delete=="" or device_id_to_delete=="":
        print ("For some reason, tag name is NULL!")
        sys.exit()
    else:
        return  [tag_to_delete,device_id_to\_delete]

########################## Delete policy tag association ########################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance
    tag_id_list=select_tag_association(myapicem)

    params={"policyTag":tag_id_list[0],"networkDeviceId":tag_id_list[1]}
    # To delete tag association, pass the name of the policy tag and the network device id as parameters
    try:
        myapicem.delete(api="policy/tag/association/",params=params,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("Something wrong while deleting policy/tag/association")
        sys.exit()   

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
The following are network devices that have policy tags
===  ============================  ==============  ===========
  #  Policy Tag associated with    Device Name     Device IP
===  ============================  ==============  ===========
  1  Branch                        Branch-Router2  207.3.1.2
  2  testPolicy                    CAMPUS-Access1  212.1.10.1
===  ============================  ==============  ===========

=> Enter a number from the list shown to delete a policy tag association: 2

status:  202
Response: {
    "version": "1.0",
    "response": {
        "url": "/api/v1/task/6d0c6ba4-44d1-4d4d-ae16-7f79194e50dd",
        "taskId": "6d0c6ba4-44d1-4d4d-ae16-7f79194e50dd"
    }
}

</code></pre>
</details>

### Delete policy tag

This is to undo `POST /policy/tag`. You need to make sure that the tag is not associated with any network device before deleting it.<br>
The API for deleting policy tag is `DELETE /policy/tag`.

#### Source code recap

1. Use `GET /policy/tag/association` API to create a list.
2. Print the policy tag association list so the user can see which tag is currently in use.
3. Prompt user to select a tag without association from the list.
4. Apply `DELETE /policy/tag` API.

#### Code -- `DELETE /policy/tag/association`

[APIC-EM API Reference Docs](https://developer.cisco.com/site/apic-em-rest-api/)

* Source code file: `lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py`
* To run the Python file, enter:<br>
	* On Linux or macOS:  `python3 lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py`<br>
	* On Windows: `py -3 lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py` or `python lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py`<br>

**Code listing : `lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py`**

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
"""
Script name: `lab6-4-delete-policy-tag.py`
Delete a policy-tag
"""

from  apicem import \* # APIC-EM IP is assigned in apicem_config.py
def select_tag(ap):
    """
    This function prompts the user to select a policy tag from a list

    Parameters
    ----------
    ap (object): An apic-em object defined in apicem.py

    Return:
    -------
    str : policy tag
    """   
    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="policy/tag/count")
        response_json = resp.json()
        count = response_json["response"] # policy tags
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while getting policy tag count!")
        sys.exit()
    if count == 0 :
        print ("No policy tag was found, so there is nothing to delete !")
        sys.exit()
    try:
        resp = ap.get(api="policy/tag/association")
        response_json = resp.json()
        tag = response_json["response"] # policy tag association
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong with GET policy/tag/association!")
        sys.exit()

    tag_list = []

    i=0
    for item in tag:
        if "policyTag" in item:
            if item["networkDevices"] == []:
                i+=1
                tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"],"",""])
            else:
                for item1 in item["networkDevices"]:
                    i+=1
                    tag_list.append([i,item["policyTag"],item1["deviceName"],item1["deviceIp"]])

    print ("*** If policy tag is associated with a network device, it cannot be deleted ***\n")
    print ("---------------- Select one with no network device attached -----------------\n")      
    print (tabulate(tag_list, headers=['Number','Policy Tag associated with','Device Name','Device IP'],tablefmt="rst"),'\n')

    # Prompt for the user's input
    # Stay in the loop until tag is selected or user selects 'exit'
    tag_to_delete=""
    tag_idx = 1 # 1 is the position of policy tag
    device_ip_idx = 3 #3 is the position of device IP
    while True:
        tag_num = input('=> Enter a number from list shown to delete the policy tag: ')
        tag_num = tag_num.replace(" ","") # ignore space
        if tag_num.lower() == 'exit':
            sys.exit()
        if tag_num.isdigit():
            if int(tag_num) in range(1,len(tag_list)+1):
                tag_to_delete=tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][tag_idx] # 1 is the position of policy tag

                if tag_list[int(tag_num)-1][device_ip_idx] !="":
                    print("This tag is still associated with a network device. Select one with no network device attached !")
                else:    
                    return tag_to_delete
            else:
                print ("Oops! That number is out of range. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
        else:
            print ("Oops! The input you entered is not a number. Please try again or enter 'exit'")
    # End of while loop

    if tag_to\_delete=="" :
        print ("For some reason, the tag name is NULL!")
        sys.exit()

############################### Delete policy tag  ##############################

if \_\_name\_\_ == "\_\_main\_\_": # Only run as a script
    myapicem = apicem() # initialize apicem instance
    tag_to_delete = select_tag(myapicem) # get the policy tag name
    params={'policyTag':tag_to_delete} # to delete the policy tag you pass the tag name as a parameter
    try:
        myapicem.delete(api="policy/tag/",params=params,printOut=True)
    except:
        print ("Something went wrong while deleting policy/tag")
        sys.exit()

</code></pre>
</details>

<details>
<summary><font color='green'><b>Output</b></font> - Click to expand</summary>

<pre><code>
Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag/count'


Executing GET 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag/association'

*** If policy tag is associated with a network device, it cannot be deleted ***

---------------- Select one with no network device attached -----------------

========  ============================  ==============  ============
  Number  Policy Tag associated with    Device Name     Device IP
========  ============================  ==============  ============
       1  Ent-Branch-QOS-Scope          CAMPUS-Dist1    212.1.10.100
       2  ptag                          CAMPUS-Core1    10.204.61.2
       3  ptag                          CAMPUS-Access1  212.1.10.1
       4  Tag_06172016
========  ============================  ==============  ============

=> Enter one of the numbers shown to delete policy tag: 3

Executing DELETE 'https://sandboxapicem.cisco.com/api/v1/policy/tag/'

status:  202
Response: {
    "response": {
        "taskId": "d7e66b83-6a6c-4147-ab9b-2bdaeaedda5b",
        "url": "/api/v1/task/d7e66b83-6a6c-4147-ab9b-2bdaeaedda5b"
    },
    "version": "1.0"
}

</code></pre>
</details>

### Session summary

When you run the `DELETE` APIs you need to consider the dependency. For example, before deleting an application you must make sure it is not currently used by any policy. <br>
If you delete a policy tag that is currently associated with device(s), you won't see any error.  You will get 202(Accepted) for the response status, but if you use `GET /task/taskId` to query you see the following error message in the response.

```
"progress": "An error occurred while deleting policy tag myTag. Policy tag myTag is currently associated with device(s). Remove the association(s) before deleting the policy tag."
```

You do this checking in the script to prevent the user from running `DELETE /policy/tag` API without knowing the real outcome of deleting the policy tag.

#### Congratulations! You've completed Part III of APIC-EM REST API Learning Labs!
